we begin with the war in Gaza and
Israel's reaction to President Biden's
warning on the supply of Us weapons to
its Ally Mr Biden has said America will
continue to give Israel the weapons it
needs to defend itself but he added
Israel won't keep Washington's support
if it carries out military operations in
heavily populated areas Israel's un
Envoy has called Mr Biden's remarks
disappointing more on that in a moment
but first here's more of what President
Biden said
civilians have been killed in Gaza as a
consequence of those bombs and other
ways in which they go after population
centers and I made it clear that if they
go into Rafa they haven't gone into Rafa
yet if they go into Rafa I'm not
supplying the weapons that have been
used historically to deal with Rafa to
deal with the cities to deal with that
problem we're going to continue to make
sure Israel is secure in terms of Iron
Dome and their ability to respond to
attacks like came out of the uh the
Middle East recently well for more on
that on North America correspondent will
Vernon sent this update from
Washington President Biden said America
would continue to give Israel the
weapons it needs to defend itself but he
said the US wouldn't Supply heavy
weapons bombs artillery shells that
could be used in a major assault on the
city of Rafa and Mr Biden said it is
these us supplied weapons that have
already killed killed civilians in Gaza
and human rights groups say uh these
Munitions are responsible for the utter
Devastation in Gaza uh now earlier we
heard from us officials who confirmed
that one shipment of heavy bombs was
delayed last week and the other
shipments were under review and that was
a hugely uh significant announcement a
historic step not for 40 years has the
US held up any arms uh deliveries to
Israel for this kind of reason the
Israeli government said uh that it was
very disappointed uh now the US of
course is Israel's biggest supplier of
military equipment its most important
Ally uh and Mr Biden has already come
under criticism from republicans in
Congress for example who say he is
abandoning a key us Ally but I think Mr
Biden is hoping that um by making this
move there have been uh many months of
expressions of deep concern from
president Biden from uh other officials
too about the conduct of the war in Gaza
about the plans for Rafa those warnings
have been more or less ignored by the
Israelis who said they're going to go
into Rafa regardless so I think Mr Biden
is hoping that this will send a clear
message sufficiently clear to the
Israelis that they must change
course will Vernon there well let's
speak to our Middle East correspondent
yoland Nell who is in Jerusalem for us
yoland uh good to have you now you and I
regularly talk about this growing Rift
between the US and Israel it's become uh
much more public now hasn't it what's
the latest we've
heard well this is being covered
extensively in the Israeli media as you
would expect there haven't been many
comments yet from Israeli officials
although we did have Israel's ambassador
to the UN gillad erdan speaking to
public radio he said that these comments
by President Biden were extremely
disappointing and they would give hope
uh to Israel's enemies um we've also had
the opposition leader yel AED coming out
and and really criticizing what he says
is Israel's um government's management
of the country uh and the the
relationship uh with the US it's a
source of of great concern among many
Israelis um that the relationship is
becoming um so strained um of course
Washington is is the closest Ally of
Israel it provides a diplomatic shield
for it as well as this huge amounts of
military assistance so it's not exactly
clear exact about how this is going to
affect things happening on the ground in
Rafa I mean from what we know there has
been uh more heavy shelling the Israeli
military continuing to carry out what it
says a targeted uh raids against Hamas
uh but people living in Rafa not just
the areas that have been given
evacuation orders tell us that it is is
terrifying that uh Panic has set in
among people and they really just don't
know where to go for their own safety
and your land uh what has Israel said
Benjamin Netanyahu said about why Israel
would move forward with such a large
scale offensive despite opposition from
its own
allies well the reason that Israel
really wants to go into Rafa with a full
uh scale invasion is because it says
there are four Hamas battalions
remaining there it's really the last
stronghold of Hamas in Gaza in um
Israel's eyes and it doesn't believe
that it can achieve the victory that it
has said is only achievable by
dismantling um Hamas in Gaza unless it
goes into this Southernmost city now of
course the problem with that which we're
starting to see already is that you have
so many displaced people uh in the city
that a fullscale Invasion there indeed
any kind of uh increased military action
really does involve huge amounts of
human suffering um we're getting reports
of people in the day of civilians having
been killed in the air strikes that have
been going on but uh even bigger than
that is the fact you now have this sort
of downward spiral in the humanitarian
situation because Aid is blocked from
going in through uh the Raffa Crossing
which Israel took control of early on
Tuesday that's not been um open to
humanitarian uh groups since and also
although Israel said um yesterday that
it was opening the Kem Shalom Crossing
after 4 days of closure it said caused
by Hamas rocket fire which killed four
Israeli soldiers nearby um and there's
so much fighting going on in that area
and Palestinian workers um fled with the
the start of the Israeli military
operation that that really means that um
no Aid is able to get in there in effect
either and your land as this Rift
becomes public there are also domestic
pressures on each of these leaders in
the US and Israel what pressures is
Benjamin Netanyahu facing domestically
right
now I mean he has uh two pressures
really I mean you have on the one hand
the hostage families who have so much
public support in Israel they're
carrying out near daily demonstrations
they say Rafa can wait bring the
hostages home they can't wait um and
then you have those far-right members of
um the coalition government that Mr
Netanyahu heads who have been saying
specifically that Rafa must be
prioritized a full invasion there
that's the only route to bring Israel
the victory that they want and they have
threatened if Israel signs up to a
reckless deal in their eyes with the
ceasefire talk still going on in Cairo
uh that they would walk away from his
government yolan thank you for that
update now as yourand was saying the
humanitarian situation on the ground is
already dire and it is getting worse a
an investigation by BBC verifi has found
over half of gaza's water and sanitation
facilities have been damaged or
destroyed since the start of the war
here's Caroline
Hy water in Gaza is in dangerously short
supply posing serious health risks to
the population BBC verify has analyzed
more than 600 water and sanitation
facilities here the dots represent a
mixture of water wells tanks
desalination and sewage treatment plants
the red dots are all those that have
been destroyed or damaged that's more
than 300 facilities AC cross the Gaza
Strip now Gaza used to have six
functioning wastewater treatment plants
which are crucial to preventing the
buildup of sewage and the spread of
disease this was one of them here it was
before October the 7th and now after
three others are also damaged or
destroyed and we've been told the
remaining two are out of action largely
because of a lack of fuel now to
compound the problem officials in Gaza
say they're struggling to repair damaged
infrastructure after an attack on a key
Warehouse where Fuel and spare parts
were stored this shows the warehouse
before and after it was struck at the
end of January the IDF said it was
targeting Hamas Fighters nearby it's
accused the group of storing weapons and
ammunition inside civilian structures
including in and near water
facilities all of this has had a very
direct human Consequence the World
Health Organization says that the
average person needs 15 lers of water
each each day for drinking washing and
cooking but most people in Gaza are
getting just a fraction of that and that
scarcity of water and untreated sewage
are causing dehydration and disease so
we are seeing death coming from uh the
outbreaks of disease um in the highly
vulnerable in the small children in the
elderly and in the pregnant women
hepatitis and pregnant women is is very
very dangerous this is killing
people people in Gaza have told us that
they're queuing for hours to access
drinking water others are drinking Dirty
Water Aid agencies want to truck in more
water but say they can't because of
limited access to fuel and this isn't
just an acute problem now exacerbated by
the current Israeli operation in Rafa
gaza's infrastructure will take years
decades to rebuild you can see our full
analysis on the BBC News
website Caroline Hy there